---
title: "Meaure Theory 2. Measure Theory"
mathjax: true
---

## Measurable Functions
### Def. Measurable Function
A function $$f$$ is measurable if $$E_a=\{x|f(x)\leq a \}$$ is measurable for all $$a$$. We can also use $$E_a=\{x|f(x) < a \}$$, $$E_a=\{x|f(x)\geq a \}$$.
A function $$f$$ is measurable iff $$f^{-1}(A)$$ is measurable for every open subset $$A \subset \mathbb{R}$$.

### Corollay
If $$f$$ is measurable and $$g$$ is continuos then $$g \circ f$$ is measurable. 
If $$f,g$$ are meausrable, $$af+bg,fg$$ are both measurable.

### Lemma
If $$f_n$$ is measurable for all $$n$$ and $$f_n(x)\rightarrow f(x)$$ for almost all $$x$$ then $$f$$ is measurable.

## Integrable Functions

### Def. characteristic function

$$\chi_E(x)$$ is 1 if $$x \in E$$ else 0.

### Def. Simple function

A linear combination of chracteristic functions of measurable sets with finite meaures.
$$g=\sum_1^k a_i \chi_{E_i}$$.
This can always be written in terms of disjoint measurable sets to make the representation unique.

The integral for this function is defined by $$\int g = \sum_1^k a_i m(E_i)$$.

Clearly, this ensures lienarity and monotonicity of the integrals.

### Monotone Convergence Theorem for Simple Functions
If $$f_n$$ is a sequence of simple functions and $$f_n \nearrow f$$ a.e., where $$f$$ is also simple, then $$\lim_{n\rightarrow \infty} f_n = \int f$$.

### Def. Non-negative functions
A non-negative measurable function $$f$$ is integrable if, for simple and non-negative functions $$g$$ with $$g \leq f$$ everywhere, $$\int f = sup_g \int g$$ is finite.

### Lemma.
If $$f_n$$ is an increasing sequence of non-negative integrable functions. Suppose $$\lim_{n \rightarrow \infty} \int f_n < \infty$$, then $$f(x)=\lim_{n \rightarrow \infty}f_n(x)$$ is finite a.a. and $$\int f = \lim_{n \rightarrow \infty} \int f_n$$.

### Def. General case

Given any measurable $$f$$, let $$f_+=max(f,0),f_-=max(-f,0)$$ and $$f=f_+-f_-$$. $$f$$ is integrable if both $$f_+,f_-$$ are integrable. $$\int f=\int f_+-\int f_-$$.

Monotonicity and linearity hold.

### Monotone Convergence Theorem
Let $$f_n$$ be a sequence of functions that's pointwise increasing. Suppose $$\int f_n$$ is bounded above. Then $$f_n$$ converges a.e. and if $$f(x)=\lim f_n(x)$$ then $$\int f = \lim \int f_n$$.

### Dominated convergence Theorem
Let $$f_n$$ be a sequence of functions that's converging pointwise to $$f$$. If $$|f_n| \leq g$$ for all $$n$$ then $$\int f = \lim \int f_n$$.

### Fubini's Theorem on $$\mathbb{R}^2$$
