---
title: "Real Analysis 2. Basic Topology"
mathjax: true
---

## Finite, countable and uncountable sets

### D1.
If $$f$$ is a mapping from $$A$$ to $$B$$, $$A$$ is called the domain, $$f(x)$$ are called **values** and the set of all values is called the **range**.

### D2.
If $$E \subset A$$, $$f(E)$$ is called the **image** of $$E$$ under $$f$$. If $$f(A)=B$$, we say that f maps A **onto** B.  
If $$E \subset B$$, $$f^{-1}(E)$$ is called the inverse image of $$E$$ under $$f$$. 
If $$f(x_1)\neq f(x_2)$$ whenever $$x_1 \neq x_2$$, then $$f$$ is a 1-1 mapping of A into B (not onto!).

### D3. 1-1 Correspondence
If there exists a 1-1 mapping of A onto B (1-1 correspondence), A and B have a 1-1 correspondence $$A \sim B$$.

### D4.
Let $$J_n=\{1,...,n\},J=\{1,2,...\}$$. $$A$$ is
- finite if $$A\sim J_n$$ for some $$n$$.
- infinite if not finite.
- countable if $$A\sim J$$.
- uncountable if not countable.
- at most countable if finite or countable.

### D7. Sequence
A sequence is $$f$$ defined on $$J$$.  
$$f(n)=x_n$$ and the sequence is denoted as $$\{x_n\}$$  
Elements of any countable set can be arranged in a sequence.

### T8.
Every infinite subset of a countable set is countable.  
(pf) Order subset of integers from small to large, and that's countable.

### T9.
$$S=\bigcup\limits_{m=1}^{\infty} E_m$$ denotes a countable union. $$\infty$$ is not $$+\infty$$.

### T12.
Countable union of countable sets $$S$$ is countable.  
(pf) Line them up in 2D diagonally and you have a unique integer for each element.

### T13.
The set of all n-tuples whose elements are in a countable set $$A$$ is also countable.  
$$n=2$$ case shows that the set of all $$Q$$ is countable.

### T14.
The set of all sequences with 0/1 are uncountable.  
(pf) Use Cantor's diagonal process.

## Metric Spaces

### D15.
A set $$X$$ is a metric space if, for $$p,q \in X$$, there is associated a real number $$d(p,q)$$ such that
- $$d(p,q)>0$$ if $$p\neq q$$,  $$d(p,q)=0$$ o.w.
- $$d(p,q)=d(q,p)$$
- $$d(p,q)\leq d(p,r)+d(r,q) \ \forall r\in X $$

### D18a. Neighborhood
For radius $$r > 0$$, $$N_r(p) = \{q: d(p,q) < r\}$$.

### D18c. Limit Point
$$p$$ is a limit point of $$E$$ if every neighborhood of $$p$$ contains $$q\neq p, q \in E$$.  
Intuitively, it's a point that can be approximated by a point in $$E$$.

### D18d. Closed
Every limit point of $$E$$ is in $$E$$.

### D18e. Interior Point
$$p$$ is an interior point of $$E$$ if there is a neighborhood $$N$$ with $$N \subset E$$.

### D18f. Open
Every point of $$E$$ is an interior point of $$E$$.
Note that a set can be both not open and not closed. $$[0,1)$$ is an example in $$R$$.

### D18i. Bounded
$$E$$ is bounded if $$\exists q \in X \ s.t. \ d(p,q) < M \ \forall p \in E$$.

### D18j. Dense
$$E$$ is dense in $$X$$ if $$x \in X$$ is either in $$E$$ or is a limit point of $$E$$. Or $$\bar{E}=X$$.
$$Q$$ is dense in $$R$$.

### T19.
Every neighborhood is an open set.
(pf) For every point $$q$$ in the set, there exists $$h$$ such that $$d(p,q)=r-h$$. All points in $$N_h(q)$$ must then be in $$E$$.

### E21g.
The segment $$(a,b)$$ is an open subset of $$R^1$$ but it is not an open subset of $$R^2$$. Whether a set is open or not depends on the set that contains it.

### T22.
$$(\bigcup_a E_a)^C = \bigcap_a (E_a^C)$$

### T23.
A set $$E$$ is open iff $$E^C$$ is closed.    
(pf) R: Every neighborhood of a limit point $$x$$ of $$E^C$$ must contain a point in $$E^C$$ to keep $$E$$ open. Because $$E$$ is open, this means $$x \in E^C$$.  
L: $$x \in E$$ is not a limit point of $$E^C$$. So there should be $$N \subset E$$, making $$x$$ and interior point of $$E$$.

### T24a.
A countable union of open sets are open.  
(pf) If $$x$$ is an interior point of one of the sets, it should be so for the union.

### T24b.
A countable intersection of closed sets are closed.  
(pf) From T24a and T22.

### T24c.
A finite intersection of open sets are open.  
(pf) Let the radius be the minimum of all radii of open sets.

### T24d.
A finite union of closed sets are closed.  
(pf) Use T22 again.

### E25.
A counterexample for "a countable intersection of open sets are open" is $$(-1/n,1/n), n=1,2,...$$. Then a countable intersection is a single point 0. A counterexample for "a countable union of closed sets are closed" is similar.

### D26. Closure
Closure of $$E$$ is the union of $$E$$ and the set of limit points of $$E$$. Denoted as $$\bar{E}$$.

### T27.
- $$\bar{E}$$ is closed.
- $$E=\bar{E}$$ iff $$E$$ is closed.
- For every closed set $$F$$ with $$E\subset F$$, $$\bar{E} \subset F$$.

### T30.
$$E \subset Y \subset X$$. $$E$$ is open relative to $$Y$$ iff $$E=Y\cap G$$ for some open $$G \subset X$$.  
(pf) R: For $$p\in E$$, $$V_p={q \in X: d(p,q)< r_p}$$. $$G=\bigcup_{p\in E}V_p$$ is open subset in $$X$$.

### D31. Open Cover
A set of open sets $$\{G_{\alpha}\}$$ such that $$E \subset \bigcup_\alpha G_\alpha$$.

### D32. Compact
$$K \subset X$$ is compact if for every open cover of $$K$$ $$\{G_\alpha\}$$, there are finitely many indices such that $$K \subset G_{\alpha_1} \cup ... \cup G_{\alpha_n}$$ (finite subcover).

### D33.
Unlike open/closed, compact doesn't depend on what is compact relative to.
$$K\subset Y\subset X$$. $$K$$ is compact relative to $$X$$ iff $$K$$ is compact relative to $$Y$$.  
(pf) R: Use T30.
L: Take the intersection of the finitely many open sets in $$X$$ and $$Y$$.

### T34.
Compact subsets of metric spaces are closed.  
(pf) Prove complement is open. See [this](https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/2111662/prove-compact-subsets-of-metric-spaces-are-closed)

### T35.
Closed subsets of compact sets are compact.  
(pf) $$F \subset K \subset X$$, $$F$$ closed, $$K$$ compact. Consider an open cover of $$F$$. This + $$F^C$$ should cover $$K$$ and since $$K$$ is compact, there's a finite subset cover. Remove $$F^C$$ from this and done.

### T36. Finite intersection property
If the intersection of every finite subcolletion of $$\{K_\alpha\}$$ (compact subset) is non empty, then the intersection of all the subsets is also non empty.  
(pf) Suppose $$K_i$$ doesn't share an element with other sets. Then the complements of the other sets form an open cover of $$K_i$$ because compact sets are closed and hence the complements are open. Since $$K_i$$ is compact, there must be finite such complements. 

### T37.
If $$E$$ is an inifinite subset of a compact set $$K$$, then $$E$$ has a limit point in $$K$$.  
(pf) If there's no limit point in $$K$$ then neighbor of each point in $$K$$ cannot contain a point in $$E$$ except itself. No finite subcollection of these neighbors (which is open) can cover $$K$$, which contradicts with $$K$$ being compact.

### T38.
Intersection of nested intervals $$I_n=[a_n,b_n]$$ is non empty.  
（pf）$$E=\{a_1,...,a_n\}$$ is bounded above by $$b_1$$. $$x=\sup E$$ which is $$a_m \leq x$$ and $$x \leq b_m$$.

### T39.
T38, but for K-cells.

### T40.
Every k-cell is compact.  
(pf) Subdivide the k-cells smaller and smaller, use T39 to show that there's an open cover. Make the radius of this open cover very large.

### T41. Heine–Borel theorem
In Euclidean space, closed and bounded iff compact.  
(pf) Closed and bounded means it's contained in k-cell, which implies that its a closed subset of compact, which is compact from T35.

### T42. 
Every bounded infinite subset of $$R^k$$ has a limit point in $$R^k$$.  
(pf) Bounded => subset of k-cell => infinite subset of a compact set has a limit point in the set.

### T43.
A set is perfect if it is closed and has no isolated points.
Non empty perfect set in $$R^k$$ is uncountable.

As a result, every closed interval is uncountable, including the set of all real numbers.

### T45. Separated
Both $$A \cap \bar{B}$$ and $$\bar{A} \cap B$$ are empty.

### T45. Connected
A set is not a union of two non empty separated sets.
