---
title: "Real Analysis 3. Numerical Sequences and Series"
mathjax: true
---

## Finite, countable and uncountable sets

### D1. Convergence
$$\{p_n\}$$ converges if there is a point $$p \in X$$ such that $$\forall \epsilon > 0, \exists n \geq N$$ such that $$d(p_n,p) < \epsilon$$.

### T2a. 
$$\{p_n\}$$ converges to $$p \in X$$ iff every neighborhood of $$p$$ contains $$p_n$$ for all but finitely many $$n$$.  
(pf) =>, For each $$\epsilon$$ used in the neighborhood, there's always a corresponding $$n$$.

<=, User the definition of convergence.

### T2b.
$$\{p_n\}$$ converges to $$p,p'$$ => $$p'=p$$.  
(pf) For arbitrary $$\epsilon$$, $$d(p,p')$$ is bounded.

### T2c.
If $$\{p_n\}$$ converges $$\{p_n\}$$ is bounded.  
(pf) Bounded by the max dist from $$p$$ to $$p_i$$. 

### T2d.
If $$p$$ is a limit point of $$E$$ the there is a sequence in $$E$$ that converges to it.  
(pf) From the definition of a limit point and convergence.

### T3.
$$(s_n+t_n) \rightarrow s+t$$  
(pf) Triangle inequality.

## Subsequences

### D5. Subsequence
Given $$\{p_n\}$$, consider an increasing sequence $$\{n_k\}$$. Then $$\{p_{n_i}\}$$ is a subsequence of $$\{p_n\}$$.

### T6a.
Some subsequence converges to a point of $$X$$.  
(pf) finite: there should be some sequence that always takes the same value $$p$$.

### T6b.
Every bounded sequence in $$R^k$$ contains a convergent subsequence.  
(pf) Implied from a, since $$R^k$$ is compact.

### T7.
Subsequential limit of a sequence in a metric space form a closed subset of the space.  
(pf) Show that the set of all subsequential limits contains its limit points. 

## Cauchy Sequences

### D8. Cauchy Sequence
$$\{p_n\}$$ is Cauchy if $$\forall \epsilon > 0, \exists n,m \geq N$$ such that $$d(p_n,p_m) < \epsilon$$.

### D9. diameter
diameter of a set is the sup of $$d(p,q)$$ of elements in the set.
$$\{p_n\}$$ is a Cachy sequenece iff $$\text{diam} E_N \rightarrow 0$$.

### T10a.
$$\text{diam} \bar{E} = \text{diam} E$$
(pf) Using the triangle inequality and the property of limit points, show $$\text{diam} \bar{E} \leq 2\epsilon \text{diam} E$$

### T10b.
If $$K_n$$ is a sequence of compact sets in $$X$$ such that $$K_n \subset K_{n+1}$$ and $$\text{diam} K_n \rightarrow 0$$, then infinite intersection of all sets in the sequenece has exactly one point.  
(pf) K is non empty from 2.36. If more then one point, contradicts $$\text{diam} K_n \rightarrow 0$$.

### T11a.
In any metric space, every convergent sequence is a Cauchy sequence.  
(pf) Use the definition of convergence and the triangle inequality.

### T11b. Cauchy criterion for convergence
If $$X$$ is a compact metric space and there's a Cauchy sequence, it converges to some point.  
(pf) 
- Let $$E_N$$ contain $$p_N,p_{N+1},...$$ in a Cauchy sequence. $$\lim \text{diam} \bar{E_N} = 0$$.
- $$E_N$$ is compact since it's closed subset of a compact space.
- From T10b, every $$\bar{E_N}$$ contains a unique point $$p$$.
- $$p \in \bar{E_N}$$ implies $$d(p,p_n) < \epsilon$$ if $$n\geq N_0$$.

### T11c. 
In $$R^k$$, every Cauchy sequence converges.  
(pf) Use Heine-Borel.

### D12. Complete
A metric space in which every Cauchy sequence converges is complete.

### D13. Monotonically increasing/decreasing

### T14.
Monotonic sequence converges iff it is bounded.  
(pf) Least upper bound of the range is where it converges to.

### D15.
$$s_n \rightarrow +\infty$$ means for every real $$M$$ there is an integer $$N$$ such that $$n\geq N$$ implies $$s_n \geq M$$.

### D16.
Let $$E$$ be the set of all subsequential limits of $$\{s_n\}$$.
$$\text{limsup} s_n=s^*=\sup E,\text{liminf} s_n=s_*=\inf E$$

### T17.
Let $$\{s_n\}$$ be a sequence of real numbers.
a. $$s^* \in E$$
(pf) from T7
b. $$x>s^*$$ => $$\exists N, n\geq N s.t. s_n < x$$  
(pf) contradiction by having number in E greater.

## Some special sequences
Idea: $$0 \leq x_n \leq s_n, n \geq N, s_n \rightarrow 0$$ then $$x_n \rightarrow 0$$.

### T20.
1. If $$p > 0$$, $$\lim \frac{1}{n^p} = 0$$.
2. If $$p > 0$$, $$\lim \sqrt[n]{p} = 1$$.
3. We have $$\lim \sqrt[n]{n} = 1$$
4. $$p > 0, \alpha \in R$$, $$\lim \frac{n^{\alpha}}{(1+p)^n}$$
5. If $$\lvert x \rvert < 1, \lim x^n = 0$$.


(pf)  

1. Take $$n > (1/\epsilon)^{1/p}$$.
2. If $$p>1$$, $$x_n=\sqrt[n]{p} - 1$$. $$1+nx_n \leq (1+x_n)^n = p$$. Hence $$0 < x_n \leq \frac{p-1}{n}$$.
3. $$x_n=\sqrt[n]{n} - 1$$. $$n=(1+x_n)^n \geq \frac{n(n-1)}{2}x_n^2$$. Hence $$0 \leq x_n \leq \sqrt{\frac{2}{n-1}}$$.
4. $$(1+p)^n > {n \choose k} p^k > \frac{n^kp^k}{2^kk!}$$. Hence $$0<\frac{n^\alpha}{(1+p)^n}<\frac{2^kk!}{p^k}n^{\alpha-k}$$
5. $$\alpha=0$$ in d

## Series

### D21.
$$\{a_n\},\{s_n\},s_n=\sum_{k=1}^n a_k$$, $$\sum_{k=1}^{\infty} a_k$$ is called an infinite series. $$s_n$$ are partial sums. 
$$\sum_{k=1}^{\infty} a_k = s$$ means that $${s_n}$$ converges to $$s$$.

### T23.
If $$\Sigma a_n$$ converges, the $$a_n \rightarrow 0$$.

### T24.
A series of nonnegative terms converges iff its partial sums form a bounded sequence.

## Comparison Test

### T25a.
If $$|a_n| \leq c_n$$ for $$n\geq N_0$$ and if $$\Sigma c_n$$ converges, then $$\Sigma a_n$$ converges.  
(pf) Use the Cauchy criterion and bound $$\Sigma a_n$$.

### T27.
"Thin" subsequence of $$\{a_n\}$$ determines the convergence or divergence of $$\Sigma a_n$$.

$$\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n$$ converges iff $$\sum_{k=0}^{\infty} 2^k a_{2^k}$$

For either $$n<2^k$$ or otherwise, $$t_k$$ bounds $$s_n$$.

(pf) By T24, show boundedness of partial sums.
$$s_n=a_1+...+a_n$$, $$t_k=a_1+2a_2+...+2^ka_{2^k}$$. If $$n<2^k$$, both bounded, otherwise both unbounded.

### T28.
$$\sum \frac{1}{n^p}$$ converges if $$p > 1$$ diverges otherwise.  
(pf) Use T23,26

### T29.
$$\sum_{n=2}^{\infty} \frac{1}{n(log n)^p}$$ converges if $$p > 1$$, diverges otherwise.

## The number $$e$$
### D30.
$$e=\sum_{n=0}^{\infty}\frac{1}{n!}=\lim_{n\rightarrow \infty}(1+\frac{1}{n})^n$$

### T32.
e is irrational
(pf) Let $$s_n=\sum_{k=0}^{n}\frac{1}{k!}$$. $$e-s_n=\frac{1}{(n+1)!}+\frac{1}{(n+2)!}+\frac{1}{(n+3)!}+... < \frac{1}{(n+1)!}(1+\frac{1}{n+1}+\frac{1}{(n+1)^2}+...) = \frac{1}{n!n}$$. Hence $$0 < e-s_n < \frac{1}{n!n}$$.

So $$0 < q!(e-s_q) < \frac{1}{q}$$.

If $$e=\frac{p}{q}$$, $$q!e$$ and $$q!s_q$$ are integers. Hence $$q!(e-s_q)$$ is also an integer, but this contradicts the inequality.

## The Root and Ratio Tests

### T33. Root Test
$$\alpha=\text{limsup} \sqrt[n]{|a_n|}$$. $$\sigma a_n$$ converges if $$\alpha < 1$$, diverges if $$\alpha > 1$$, no information if $$\alpha = 1$$

### T34. Ratio Tests
Converges if $$\text{limsup}|a_{n+1}/a_n|<1$$.
Diverges if $$|a_{n+1}/a_n| \geq 1, \forall n \geq n_0$$ 

### D38. Power Series
Given $$\{c_n\}$$, $$\sum_{n=0}^{\infty} c_n z^n$$ is called a power series.

### T39.
$$\sum_{n=0}^{\infty} c_n z^n$$ converges if $$|z| < R$$ where $$R=1/\alpha,\alpha=\text{limsup} \sqrt[n]{|c_n|}$$.

## Absolute Convergence
### T45. 
$$\sum a_n$$ converges absolutely if $$\sum |a_n|$$ converges.

## Rearrangements
### T54. 
$$\exists \sum a_n'$$ with with partial sums $$s_n'$$ such that $$\text{liminf} s'_n=\alpha,\text{limsup} s'_n=\beta$$.

### T55. 
If a series converges absolutely, then every rearragenment converges to the same sum.