---
title: "Meaure Theory 1. Measure Theory"
mathjax: true
---

### Lemma 1.1
$$R=\bigcup_{k=1}^N R_k$$, and each rectangle $$R_k$$ almost disjoint (i.e. interior is disjoint), $$|R|=\sum_{k=1}^N|R_k|$$.

### Lemma 1.2
$$R \subset \bigcup_{k=1}^N R_k$$ then, $$|R|\leq \sum_{k=1}^N|R_k|$$.

### Theorem 1.3
Every open subset $$O \subset \mathbb{R}$$ can be written uniquely as a countable union of disjoint open intervals.

### Theorem 1.4
Every open subset $$O \subset \mathbb{R}^d$$ can be written as a countable union of almost disjoint closed cubes.

### Def. Exterior Measure
For $$E \subset \mathbb{R}^d$$
$$m_*(E)=\inf \sum_{j=1}^{\infty}|Q_j|$$

### Obs 1. Monotonicity
If $$E_1 \subset E_2$$ then $$m_*(E_1)\leq m_*(E_2)$$.

### Obs 2. Countable Sub-additivity
If $$E = \cup_{j=1}^infty E_j$$ then $$m_*(E)\leq \sum_{j=1}^{\infty}m_*(E_j)$$.

### Obs 3. 
If $$E \subset \mathbb{R}^d$$, $$m_*(E)=\inf m_*(\mathbb{O})$$ where the infimum is taken over all open sets containing $$E$$.

### Obs 4. 
If $$E=E_1\cup E_2$$ and $$d(E_1,E_2) >0$$ then $$m_*(E)=m_*(E_1)+m_*(E_2)$$.

### Property 1. 
Every open set in $$\mathbb{R}^d$$ is measurable.

### Property 2.
If exterior measure is 0, then the set is measurable.

### Property 4.
Closed sets are measurable.

### Property 6.
A countable intersection of measurable sets is measurable.



---------------

### Prop 2.1.
The exterior measure of a closed rectangle $$E$$ is equal to its volume.

### Prop 2.2.
If $$E$$ is a countable union,
$$E=\bigcup_{n=1}^\infty E_n$$ then $$m_*(E)\leq \sum m_*(E_n)$$.

### Def 2.3
A subset $$E \subset \mathbb{R}^d$$ is measurable if for all subsets $$A \subset \mathbb{R}^d$$ of finite measure, $$m_*(A)=m_*(A\cap E) + m_*(A\cup E^C)$$.

### Lemma 2.5
If $$E \subset \mathbb{R}^d$$ is measurable, then so is its complement. If $$E_1$$ and $$E_2$$ are measurable, then so are the unions and the intersections of the two.

### Prop 2.6.
Countable unions of measurable sets are measurable. If disjoint, the measure is equal to the sum.

### Corollary 2.7.
If $$E_n$$ are measurable and $$E_n \nearrow E$$ then $$m(E)=\lim m(E_n)$$. If $$E_n \searrow E$$ and $$E_1$$ has finite measure,  then $$m(E)=\lim m(E_n)$$


### Theorem 3.4
Suppose $$E$$ is measurable in $$\mathbb{R}^d$$. Then, for every $$\epsilon >0$$,
1. $$\exists O$$ with $$E \subset O, m(O-E) \leq \epsilon$$.
2. the above holds for a closed set
3. if $$m(E)$$ is finite, the above holds for a compact set.
4. if $$m(E)$$ is finite, there exists a finite uion of closed cubes such that $$m(E\triangle F)\leq \epsilon$$. $$E\triangle F$$ consists of points that belong to only one of the two sets.

### Def 2.8.
Stein and Sharkarchi's definition
a set $$E$$ is measurable if, given any $$\epsilon >0$$ we can find an open set $$O \supset E$$ with $$m_*(O \backslash E) \leq \epsilon$$.