---
title: "Real Analysis 1. The Real and Complex Number Systems"
mathjax: true
---

## Ordered Sets

### D6. Ordered Set
A set $$S$$ in which an order is defined, namely for $$x,y,z \in S$$:
- Exactly one of $$x < y, x = y, y < x$$ is true.
- Satisfies $$x < y, y < z \rightarrow x < z$$

### D7. Bounded Above
$$E \subset S$$ is bounded above if
$$\exists \beta \in S, \forall x \in E, x \leq \beta$$.

### D8. Least Upper Bound
$$\alpha \in S$$ is a least upper bound of $$E \subset S$$, $$\alpha=\sup E$$ if 
- $$\alpha$$ is an upper bound of $$E$$
- If $$\gamma < \alpha$$ then $$\gamma$$ is not an upper bound 

### D10. Least Upper Bound Property
If $$E \subset S$$, not empty and bounded above, $$\sup E$$ exists in $$S$$.
Ex. $$Q$$ doesn't satisfy this.

### T11.
Let $$S$$ be an ordered set with the least upper bound property. For $$E \subset S$$, not empty and bounded below, let $$L$$ be the set of all lower bounds of $$B$$. Then $$\alpha=\sup L \in S, \alpha=\inf B$$.
(pf)
- Every $$x \in B$$ is an upper bound of $$L$$. 
- $$L$$ is bounded above by $$\alpha$$. 
- $$\alpha$$ satisfies the definition of a lower bound of $$B$$, so $$\alpha \in L$$. 
- It also satisfies the definition of $$\inf B$$.

## Fields
### D12. Field
A field is a set with addition and multiplication, each satisfing its axioms + the distributive law.

### D17. Ordered Field
A field which is also an ordered set.

## The Real Field
### T19. Existence Theorem
There exists $$R$$ with the least upper bound property and contains $$Q$$ as a subfield.
This shows the existence of real numbers.

### T20a. Archimedean Property of R
For $$x,y\in R, x > 0, \exists n > 0$$ such that $$nx > y$$.
(pf) 
- $$A$$: set of all $$nx$$.
- If the statement was false, $$\exists \alpha=\sup A$$.
- $$\alpha-x < \alpha$$ since $$\alpha-x$$ is not an upper bound of $$A$$.
- But then $$\alpha < (m+1)x \in A$$, contradiction.

### T20b. Q is dense in R
For $$x,y\in R, x < y, \exists p \in Q$$ such that $$x < p < y$$. 
(pf)
- Let $$x=y-x,y=1$$ in a, $$\exists n >0, n(y-x) > 1$$. (1)
- Let $$nx=m_1,y=nx$$ in a, $$\exists m_1 >0, m_1 > nx$$.
- Let $$nx=m_2,y=-nx$$ in a, $$\exists m_2 >0, m_2 > -nx$$.
- $$-m_2 < nx < m_1$$ \Rightarrow $$m-1 \leq nx < m$$ (2)
- Combine (1) and (2), $$x < \frac{m}{n} < y$$.

### T21.
$$\forall x > 0, n > 0 \text{(integer)}$$ there is exactly one $$y > 0$$ such that $$y^n=x$$.

## The Extended Real Number System
## D23.
$$R$$ and $$+\infty,-\infty$$, and define $$-\infty< x< +\infty$$.

## The Complex Field
### D24. Complex Number
Ordered pair $$(a,b)$$ of real numbers. For $$x=(a,b),y=(c,d)$$,
$$x+y=(a+c,b+d),xy=(ac-bd,ad+bc)$$.

### D27. i
$$i=(0,1)$$

### D30. Conjugate
$$z=a+bi$$, conjugate $$\bar{z}=a-bi$$.

### D32. Absolute value
$$|z|=(z\bar{z})^{1/2}$$

### T35. Shwartz Inequality
$$|\sum_{j=1}^n a_j \bar{b_j}| \leq \sum_{j=1}^n |a_j|^2 \sum_{j=1}^n |b_j|^2$$